3-Repro-Code/reproducible_workflow.md, before:

---
layout: page
root: ../..
title: Reproducible Workflows
---

Reproducible Workflows
======================

We're now in the home stretch of the workshop --- congratulations! Up
to this point, we've talked about how to make your code efficient
(good programming practices), accurate (testing), and maintainable
(modularization + version control). Now we're going to talk about a
final and very important concept known as reproducibility.

For our purposes, we can summarize the goal of reproducibility in two
ways, one of which is a hard requirement and the other of which is an
aspirational goal (sometimes, but not always, attainable).

First, as a hard requirement, you should always __have a complete
chain of custody (i.e., provenance) from your raw data to your
finished results and figures__. That is, you should _always_ be able
to figure out precisely what data and what code were used to generate
what result --- there should be no "missing links". If you have ever
had the experience of coming across a great figure that you made
months ago and having no idea how in the world you made it, then you
understand why provenance is important. Or, worse, if you've ever been
unable to recreate the results that you once showed on a poster or
(gasp) published in a paper...

Second, as a more aspirational goal, I should be able to sneak into
your lab late at night, delete everything except for your raw data and
your code, and __you should be able to run a single command to
regenerate EVERYTHING, including all of your results, tables, and
figures in their final, polished form__. Think of this as the "push
button" workflow. This is your ultimate organizational goal as a
computational scientist. As an added bonus, if you couple this with a
version control system that tracks changes over time to your raw data
and your code, you will be able to instantly recreate your results
from any stage in your research (the lab presentation version, the
dissertation version, the manuscript version, the Nobel Prize
committee version, etc.). Wouldn't that be nice?

In practice, the aspirational, push button goal will be achievable for
nearly all of your research projects with one key exception, which are
projects that require the use of a proprietary software tool somewhere
along the line that only has a graphical interface. In this case, you
should still focus on making as much of your workflow as automated as
you can. For the portion of the research that cannot be easily
automated, carefully document exactly what version of the software you
used, what exact menu options that you checked, what data you used for
input, and where the output was saved. You will often be able to
achieve a sort of modifed push button workflow in which you push one
button to do some work, then follow a carefully described manual
procedure in the middle, then push another button to finish generating
the output.

In many simple research projects, including the example project that
we've built in this workshop, a fully automated push button workflow
is not only possible but relatively easy to construct. This lesson
will illustrate the basic steps needed to achieve this:

1.  Create a clear and useful directory structure for our project.
2.  Set up (and use) Git to track our changes.
3.  Add the raw data to our project.
4.  Write the core "scientific code" to perform the analysis, including tests.
5.  Create a "runall" script to generate results for our specific project.
6.  Push the button and watch the magic.

One final note --- the workflow that we're following here is just a
suggestion. Organizing code and data is an art, and a room of 100
scientists will give you 101 opinions about how to do it
best. Consider the below a useful place to get started, and once
you've become comfortable with this basic outline, don't hesitate to
tinker and customize.

1\. Setting up the project directory
------------------------------------

As we've done throughout this workshop, let's create a project (a
reasonably self-contained set of code, data, and results to answer a
discrete scientific question) that will analyze the number of birds
counted during a field survey. We begin by creating a directory called
`raptor_inflam` in a convenient place on our hard drive (if you've
completed the [version control lesson]({{page.root}}/lessons/git/),
note that we're starting a new project directory here, which will be
organized and managed more comprehensively than the example in that
lesson).

Now, within the `raptor_inflam` directory, create four subdirectories (for bonus points, do this from the command line):

    .
    |-- data
    |-- man
    |-- results
    |-- src

The `data` directory will hold all of the raw data associated with the
project, which in this case will be just a single large csv file
containing data on the inflammation data.

The `man` folder, short for manuscript, will (someday) contain the
manuscript that we'll write describing the results of our
analysis. You can consider this directory optional, as there are good
arguments both for and against the practical value of putting your
manuscripts under version control. I'd suggest at least trying it once
to see if you feel that it makes your life easier. Note that if you
write your manuscripts in a plain text format like LaTeX or Markdown
(perhaps in concert with [pandoc](http://pandoc.org)), you will be
able to use version control to diff and merge your manuscript drafts,
which can be useful.

Finally, the `results` folder will contain the results of our
analysis, including both tables and figures, and the `src` directory
will contain all of our code used to perform the analysis.

In a more complex project, each of these directories may have
additional subdirectories to help keep things organized.

2\. Initialize a Git repository
-------------------------------

Since we want to use version control to track the development of our
project, we'll start off right away by initializing an empty Git
repository within this directory. To do this, open a terminal window,
navigate to the main `raptor_inflam` directory, and run the command
`git init`.

As you add things to the project directory, and modify old things,
you'll want to frequently commit your changes, as we discussed in the
Git tutorial.

3\. Add raw data
----------------

Often, we start a project with a particular data file, or set of data
files. In this case, we have the file `inflammation-01.csv`, which
contains the records that we want to analyze. If you don't have it
already, download this file [here](data/inflammation-01.csv) and
place it in the `data` subdirectory.

Now we reach an interesting question --- should the files in your
`data` directory be placed under version control (i.e., should you
`git add` and `git commit` these files)? Although you might
automatically think that this is necessary, in principle our raw data
should never change --- that is, there's only one version (the
original version!), and it will never be updated (any modified
versions of our data are considered a "result"). As a result, it's not
necessarily useful to place this file under version control for the
purpose of tracking changes to it.

A reasonable rule of thumb for getting started is that if the file is
realatively small (ours is < 100k), go ahead and commit it to the tit
repository, as you won't be wasting much hard disk
space. Additionally, the file will then travel with your code, so if
you push your repository to GitHub (for example) and one of your
collaborators clones a copy, they'll have everything they need to
generate your results.

However, if your file is realatively large AND is backed up elsewhere,
you might want to avoid making a duplicate copy in the `.git`
directory.

In either case, you'll want to ensure that every one of your data
files has some sort of metadata associated with it to describe where
it came from, how it got to you, the meaning of the columns,
etc. There are many formats for metadata that vary from simple to very
complex. Ecologists, for example, have a standard known as
[Ecological Metadata Language](http://knb.ecoinformatics.org/software/eml/)
standards and a tool
[Morpho](http://knb.ecoinformatics.org/morphoportal.jsp) for creating
metadata files. For your own private work, make sure that, at a
minimum, you create a `README.txt` file that describes your data as
best you can.

Copy and paste the text below into a `README.txt` file and place it in
the data subdirectory. Remember that this is a bare-bones description
--- in your own work, you'll want to include as much information as
you have.

	Data downloaded from North American Breeding Bird Survey web
    interface at http://www.pwrc.usgs.gov/BBS/RawData/ on December
    9, 2017. Table contains summary species counts for California.

At this point, your project directory should look like this:

	.
    |-- data
    |   |-- inflammation-01.csv
    |   |-- README.txt
    |-- man
    |-- results
    |-- src

Commit both the data and README files to your git repository.

What about the case in which your raw data is hosted elsewhere, on a
SQL server, for example, or a shared hard drive with your lab? Now
your data is living somewhere else, and you don't necessarily have
direct control over its provenance (what if someone changes it while
you weren't looking?). In this situation, you should try to make your
`runall.py` script (see below) make a copy of the metadata associated
with the dataset (it does have metadata, doesn't it?), which hopefully
will include something like a version number and a last-updated date,
and store this along with your results. That way you'll at least have
some information on the version of the data that was used. If there's
no metadata, try to shame your collaborators into creating some. If
all else fails, at least record the date on which your analysis was
run so that, in principle, you could later try to find out what state
the raw data was in on that date. If you're really nervous about the
data changing, though, you might want to look into making yourself a
local copy.

4\. Write code to perform analysis
----------------------------------

Now for the real work --- writing the code that will perform our
analysis. As before, we'll separate the "scientific" part of our code,
which does the conceptual heavy lifting of our analysis, from the more
specific parts of the code that handle the logistics of running this
particular, individual analysis.

In our case, the scientific "guts" of our code are found in the
`01-starting-with-data.Rmd` module AND, just as importantly, in the
test file that we wrote to verify that the function in our module is
working properly. So at this point, we can just copy the
`01-starting-with-data.Rmd` and `02-func-R.Rmd` into our
`src` directory. If you don't have these handy, or if you didn't
finish these exercises in the previous lesson, you can download a
complete working copy of the module
[here](01-starting-with-data.Rmd) and the test file
[here](02-func-R.Rmd). Note that these files have
"-master" in their file names, to distinguish them from the ones that
you may have created in previous lessons --- if you're going to use
these downloaded versions going forward, you can remove the "-master"
part from the file names.


At this point, your project directory should look like this:

    .
    |-- data
    |   |-- inflammation-01.csv
    |   |-- README.txt
    |-- man
    |-- results
    |-- src
    |   |-- 01-starting-with-data.Rmd
    |   |-- 02-func-R.Rmd

Make sure that you commit these three new files (your module, test
file, and test data set) to your git repository. You can commit these
together, or separately if you think it would be useful to add a
different commit message for the different files. 

Now, of course, that copying and pasting in a completed module is not
the normal workflow for this step. Normally, you'd spend
days/weeks/months working in the `src` directory, writing code and
tests, generating intermediate results, looking at the results,
writing new code and tests, generating new results, etc. This
iterative cycle isn't unlike writing a paper --- you spew out a draft
that's not so bad (but also not so good), then go back and revise it,
then spew out some new material, revise that, etc.

At this point, it's worth taking a moment to discuss how you might
approach this iterative software development cycle. Below are two
possible suggestions, although the "stack" that one chooses to use is
very much a personal preference.


5\. The runall script
---------------------

Now that we have our core functions and tests in place, it's time to
implement the "button" for our push-button workflow --- the
`runall.R` script. We have not created this yet, so go ahead and
create a new .R script.

As a reminder, the idea of the `runall` script is to collect all of
the "wrapper" code that's needed to run this particular analysis into
a single file. When you execute this file with the command `R
runall.R`, it will fill in your previously empty results directory
with the output of our analysis (in this case, a table and a plot).

After creating this file, commit the `runall` script to your git repo.

6\. Run the push button analysis
--------------------------------

You can now imagine that you have finished a chatper of your thesis,
and you are ready to submit it to Nature. But first, you would want to
make sure all is well with your code and data. 

You would first __delete all the files in your results directory.__
(sound scary?) But with `runall` script you can run everything again
and marvel at your fully reproducible workflow! This "delete and
rerun" strategy actually comes up in real life --- if you've been
making a lot of changes to your code, and aren't quite sure what's in
your `results` directory, you may want to periodically clear out this
folder and re-run everything to make sure that everything is
regenerating properly.

At this point, a natural question to ask is whether you need to add
the contents of your `results` directory to your git repository. The
answer should be obvious --- you do not need to do this, since the
files in your `results` directory contain no unique information on
their own. Everything you need to create them is contained in the
`data` and `src` directories. One exception to this, though, might be
if your analysis takes a very long time to run and the outputs are
fairly small in size, in which case you may want to periodically
commit (so that you can easily recover) the results associated with
"intermediate" versions of your code.

While many of your projects will be nearly this simple, some will be
more complex, sometimes significantly so. You will eventually come
across the need to deal with modules that are shared across multiple
projects, running the same analysis on multiple sets of parameters
simultaneously, running analyses on multiple computers, etc. While we
don't have time to go into these extra bits in detail, feel free to
ask the instructors about any specific issues that you expect to
encounter in the near future.

And that just about does it. Good luck!

Commit message:

start to adapt Justins repro-coding

3-Repro-Code/reproducible_workflow.md, after:



Reproducible Coding [1]
======================

[1] Thanks to [Justin Kitzes and Lauren Ponisio](https://bids.github.io/2017-01-12-ucb/) for these materials.

<!--We're now in the home stretch of the workshop --- congratulations! Up
to this point, we've talked about how to make your code efficient
(good programming practices), accurate (testing), and maintainable
(modularization + version control). Now we're going to talk about a
final and very important concept known as reproducibility.-->

For our purposes, we can summarize the goal of reproducibility in two
ways, one of which is a hard requirement and the other of which is an
aspirational goal (sometimes, but not always, attainable).

First, as a hard requirement, you should always __have a complete
chain of custody (i.e., provenance) from your raw data to your
finished results and figures__. That is, you should _always_ be able
to figure out precisely what data and what code were used to generate
what result --- there should be no "missing links". If you have ever
had the experience of coming across a great figure that you made
months ago and having no idea how in the world you made it, then you
understand why provenance is important. Or, worse, if you've ever been
unable to recreate the results that you once showed on a poster or
(gasp) published in a paper...

Second, as a more aspirational goal, I should be able to sneak into
your lab late at night, delete everything except for your raw data and
your code, and __you should be able to run a single command to
regenerate EVERYTHING, including all of your results, tables, and
figures in their final, polished form__. Think of this as the "push
button" workflow. This is your ultimate organizational goal as a
computational scientist. As an added bonus, if you couple this with a
version control system that tracks changes over time to your raw data
and your code, you will be able to instantly recreate your results
from any stage in your research (the lab presentation version, the
dissertation version, the manuscript version, the Nobel Prize
committee version, etc.). Wouldn't that be nice?

In practice, the aspirational, push button goal will be achievable for
nearly all of your research projects with one key exception, which are
projects that require the use of a proprietary software tool somewhere
along the line that only has a graphical interface. In this case, you
should still focus on making as much of your workflow as automated as
you can. For the portion of the research that cannot be easily
automated, carefully document exactly what version of the software you
used, what exact menu options that you checked, what data you used for
input, and where the output was saved. You will often be able to
achieve a sort of modifed push button workflow in which you push one
button to do some work, then follow a carefully described manual
procedure in the middle, then push another button to finish generating
the output.

In many simple research projects, including the example project that
we've built in this workshop, a fully automated push button workflow
is not only possible but relatively easy to construct. This lesson
will illustrate the basic steps needed to achieve this:

1.  Create a clear and useful directory structure for our project.
2.  Set up (and use) Git to track our changes.
3.  Add the raw data to our project.
4.  Write the core "scientific code" to perform the analysis, including tests.
5.  Create a "runall" script to generate results for our specific project.
6.  Push the button and watch the magic.

One final note --- the workflow that we're following here is just a
suggestion. Organizing code and data is an art, and a room of 100
scientists will give you 101 opinions about how to do it
best. Consider the below a useful place to get started, and once
you've become comfortable with this basic outline, don't hesitate to
tinker and customize.

1\. Setting up the project directory
------------------------------------

As we've done throughout this workshop, let's create a project (a
reasonably self-contained set of code, data, and results to answer a
discrete scientific question) that will analyze the number of birds
counted during a field survey. We begin by creating a directory called
`raptor_inflam` in a convenient place on our hard drive (if you've
completed the [version control lesson]({{page.root}}/lessons/git/),
note that we're starting a new project directory here, which will be
organized and managed more comprehensively than the example in that
lesson).

Now, within the `raptor_inflam` directory, create four subdirectories (for bonus points, do this from the command line):

    .
    |-- data
    |-- rawdata
    |-- paper
    |-- output
    |-- do

The `data` directory will hold all of the raw data associated with the
project, which in this case will be just a single large csv file
containing data on the inflammation data.

The `paper` folder will (someday) contain the
manuscript that we'll write describing the results of our
analysis. You can consider this directory optional, as there are good
arguments both for and against the practical value of putting your
manuscripts under version control. I'd suggest at least trying it once
to see if you feel that it makes your life easier. Note that if you
write your manuscripts in a plain text format like LaTeX or Markdown
(perhaps in concert with [pandoc](http://pandoc.org)), you will be
able to use version control to diff and merge your manuscript drafts,
which can be useful.

Finally, the `output` folder will contain the results of our
analysis, including both tables and figures, and the `do` directory
will contain all of our code used to perform the analysis. (If you can't tell, we were raised on Stata.)

In a more complex project, each of these directories may have
additional subdirectories to help keep things organized.

2\. Initialize a Git repository
-------------------------------

Since we want to use version control to track the development of our
project, we'll start off right away by initializing an empty Git
repository within this directory. To do this, open a terminal window,
navigate to the main directory, and run the command
`git init`.

As you add things to the project directory, and modify old things,
you'll want to frequently commit your changes, as we discussed in the
Git tutorial.

3\. Add raw data
----------------

Often, we start a project with a particular data file, or set of data
files. 

Now we reach an interesting question --- should the files in your
`data` directory be placed under version control (i.e., should you
`git add` and `git commit` these files)? Although you might
automatically think that this is necessary, in principle our raw data
should never change --- that is, there's only one version (the
original version!), and it will never be updated (any modified
versions of our data are considered a "result"). As a result, it's not
necessarily useful to place this file under version control for the
purpose of tracking changes to it.

A reasonable rule of thumb for getting started is that if the file is
realatively small (ours is < 100k), go ahead and commit it to the
repository, as you won't be wasting much hard disk
space. Additionally, the file will then travel with your code, so if
you push your repository to GitHub (for example) and one of your
collaborators clones a copy, they'll have everything they need to
generate your results.

However, if your file is realatively large AND is backed up elsewhere,
you might want to avoid making a duplicate copy in the `.git`
directory.

In either case, you'll want to ensure that every one of your data
files has some sort of metadata associated with it to describe where
it came from, how it got to you, the meaning of the columns,
etc. There are many formats for metadata that vary from simple to very
complex. Ecologists, for example, have a standard known as
[Ecological Metadata Language](http://knb.ecoinformatics.org/software/eml/)
standards and a tool
[Morpho](http://knb.ecoinformatics.org/morphoportal.jsp) for creating
metadata files. For your own private work, make sure that, at a
minimum, you create a `README.txt` file that describes your data as
best you can.

Copy and paste the text below into a `README.txt` file and place it in
the data subdirectory. Remember that this is a bare-bones description
--- in your own work, you'll want to include as much information as
you have.

	Data downloaded from North American Breeding Bird Survey web
    interface at http://www.pwrc.usgs.gov/BBS/RawData/ on December
    9, 2017. Table contains summary species counts for California.

At this point, your project directory should look like this:

	.
    |-- data
    |   |-- inflammation-01.csv
    |   |-- README.txt
    |-- man
    |-- results
    |-- src

Commit both the data and README files to your git repository.

What about the case in which your raw data is hosted elsewhere, on a
SQL server, for example, or a shared hard drive with your lab? Now
your data is living somewhere else, and you don't necessarily have
direct control over its provenance (what if someone changes it while
you weren't looking?). In this situation, you should try to make your
`runall.py` script (see below) make a copy of the metadata associated
with the dataset (it does have metadata, doesn't it?), which hopefully
will include something like a version number and a last-updated date,
and store this along with your results. That way you'll at least have
some information on the version of the data that was used. If there's
no metadata, try to shame your collaborators into creating some. If
all else fails, at least record the date on which your analysis was
run so that, in principle, you could later try to find out what state
the raw data was in on that date. If you're really nervous about the
data changing, though, you might want to look into making yourself a
local copy.

4\. Write code to perform analysis
----------------------------------

Now for the real work --- writing the code that will perform our
analysis. As before, we'll separate the "scientific" part of our code,
which does the conceptual heavy lifting of our analysis, from the more
specific parts of the code that handle the logistics of running this
particular, individual analysis.

In our case, the scientific "guts" of our code are found in the
`01-starting-with-data.Rmd` module AND, just as importantly, in the
test file that we wrote to verify that the function in our module is
working properly. So at this point, we can just copy the
`01-starting-with-data.Rmd` and `02-func-R.Rmd` into our
`src` directory. If you don't have these handy, or if you didn't
finish these exercises in the previous lesson, you can download a
complete working copy of the module
[here](01-starting-with-data.Rmd) and the test file
[here](02-func-R.Rmd). Note that these files have
"-master" in their file names, to distinguish them from the ones that
you may have created in previous lessons --- if you're going to use
these downloaded versions going forward, you can remove the "-master"
part from the file names.


At this point, your project directory should look like this:

    .
    |-- data
    |   |-- inflammation-01.csv
    |   |-- README.txt
    |-- man
    |-- results
    |-- src
    |   |-- 01-starting-with-data.Rmd
    |   |-- 02-func-R.Rmd

Make sure that you commit these three new files (your module, test
file, and test data set) to your git repository. You can commit these
together, or separately if you think it would be useful to add a
different commit message for the different files. 

Now, of course, that copying and pasting in a completed module is not
the normal workflow for this step. Normally, you'd spend
days/weeks/months working in the `src` directory, writing code and
tests, generating intermediate results, looking at the results,
writing new code and tests, generating new results, etc. This
iterative cycle isn't unlike writing a paper --- you spew out a draft
that's not so bad (but also not so good), then go back and revise it,
then spew out some new material, revise that, etc.

At this point, it's worth taking a moment to discuss how you might
approach this iterative software development cycle. Below are two
possible suggestions, although the "stack" that one chooses to use is
very much a personal preference.


5\. The runall script
---------------------

Now that we have our core functions and tests in place, it's time to
implement the "button" for our push-button workflow --- the
`runall.R` script. We have not created this yet, so go ahead and
create a new .R script.

As a reminder, the idea of the `runall` script is to collect all of
the "wrapper" code that's needed to run this particular analysis into
a single file. When you execute this file with the command `R
runall.R`, it will fill in your previously empty results directory
with the output of our analysis (in this case, a table and a plot).

After creating this file, commit the `runall` script to your git repo.

6\. Run the push button analysis
--------------------------------

You can now imagine that you have finished a chatper of your thesis,
and you are ready to submit it to Nature. But first, you would want to
make sure all is well with your code and data. 

You would first __delete all the files in your results directory.__
(sound scary?) But with `runall` script you can run everything again
and marvel at your fully reproducible workflow! This "delete and
rerun" strategy actually comes up in real life --- if you've been
making a lot of changes to your code, and aren't quite sure what's in
your `results` directory, you may want to periodically clear out this
folder and re-run everything to make sure that everything is
regenerating properly.

At this point, a natural question to ask is whether you need to add
the contents of your `results` directory to your git repository. The
answer should be obvious --- you do not need to do this, since the
files in your `results` directory contain no unique information on
their own. Everything you need to create them is contained in the
`data` and `src` directories. One exception to this, though, might be
if your analysis takes a very long time to run and the outputs are
fairly small in size, in which case you may want to periodically
commit (so that you can easily recover) the results associated with
"intermediate" versions of your code.

While many of your projects will be nearly this simple, some will be
more complex, sometimes significantly so. You will eventually come
across the need to deal with modules that are shared across multiple
projects, running the same analysis on multiple sets of parameters
simultaneously, running analyses on multiple computers, etc. While we
don't have time to go into these extra bits in detail, feel free to
ask the instructors about any specific issues that you expect to
encounter in the near future.

And that just about does it. Good luck!
